In this video I'm going to teach you more about indexing variables.
So indexing.
Now I've already introduced you to the concept of indexing when I showed you how to work with lists.
A couple of videos ago.
So there's going to be a little bit of a review in this video, but I'm also going to introduce you
to a couple of new concepts in indexing that are like really useful and use all the time in deep learning
and llms.
And I'll also introduce you to a couple of new functions.
And in fact, let's already start by looking at a new function.
So there's a function called range.
And again you can see that as I type the word range the color of the text changed from black to this
kind of like dark yellow mauve color.
Okay.
So I'm going to put type range and then in parentheses the number five.
Now you can see this returns a Range object and it says zero five.
Now what is this range object do?
Well, this is an iterable.
We use it for for loops.
If you are not familiar with for loops then don't worry.
I will introduce you to that a little bit later on in the tutorial.
But this basically allows us to loop over or to iterate over numbers between 0 and 5.
So there's a little bit more than that range objects can do.
But that's kind of the the basics.
Okay.
Now we can convert this range object into a list by just typing the word list.
You can see this is also a special function that's a reserved keyword.
It turns blue.
And now we get the numbers zero through four.
So this is you know what happened to five over here.
This is, um, a confusing aspect of Python that I promise you will get familiar with.
It will feel more natural, but it's unintuitive in the beginning that whenever we are counting in Python,
we start counting at zero.
I've already mentioned that in a previous video, but that means we also finish counting at one minus
the number that you actually think we're going to stop counting at.
So if you tell Python to count up to five, Python only counts up to four.
And why is that the case?
Well, you know, when we start at zero, then if we want five numbers, we have to start at one integer
below this point over here.
So there is a logic to it.
It's and it will become more natural as you work with Python more and more.
Okay.
So we call these exclusive upper bounds.
I will write that out because that's quite a mouthful.
So x exclusive upper bound.
So this is the upper bound.
And exclusive means that when Python is actually counting this number that we specify gets Excluded.
Okay.
Anyway, so now we have a list.
I'm going to call this variable a list.
And we can look at the variable a list.
Or maybe if you prefer, you know I used a list before.
Let's call this variable B list.
How about that.
Okay.
So now we have this list.
And the variable name is called b list.
And now what I already introduced you to in a previous video is accessing individual elements of this
list using indexing.
So for example B list three is going to return.
What is it going to return.
Well if we think about the index three that's actually the fourth position because we start counting
at zero.
So this is the first element but it's index 0123.
So in this case you know because we are counting here it ends up being this three gives us also an output
of three.
But do not be confused because this three and this three are completely different things.
This three is an index into the list, whereas this three is the information stored at index location
three.
Okay, so that is just a little bit of review.
What I want to show you now is something new in in indexing.
So let's say we want to get this last element.
Now it is the number four.
And it also happens to be index four.
So we could write this but let's say maybe we don't necessarily know exactly how long this list is.
Exactly how many elements are in that list.
So but we still you know, we want the last element anyway even though we don't know exactly how long
it is.
So indexing in Python has this nice feature where we can use negative numbers to index.
Okay.
So I can write negative one as the index.
Now if you're new to indexing This might seem a little bit weird because if this is the zeroth index,
then you know what happens to the left of this.
Well, there's nothing to the left.
There's no minus one over here.
But what Python does and the way to think about this is the negative numbers are wrapping around the
back.
So negative one actually corresponds to this value because yeah you go all the way to the end and then
you go minus one.
So minus one here is also going to give us four because that is the the final element in this list.
So therefore what do you think is going to be minus two.
I'm sure you guessed the answer is going to be three.
And why is this three.
Because we are going minus two from the end.
So this is minus one and this is minus two.
And now this is an index.
And so when we use the square brackets with this variable, this list that gives us not the element
at the last position, but the element at the second to last position.
So that is that element of that list is three.
Okay.
I want to show you something that is often a source of errors.
Let's say you are you want to access the final element of this list B list.
It's very it's a very easy mistake to make to use parentheses here, especially if you are coming from
another programming language.
If you worked in Matlab before, for example, this is how you index in Matlab with with parentheses
like this.
Here you will see this error list is not callable.
Anytime you see an error message, if you're trying to index, if you see an error message that says
something about, you know, object is not callable, then the first thing you should think of is oh,
I accidentally used Parentheses.
I probably meant to use square brackets.
Okay.
Very typical error message that you will see.
Okay, so let's get this out of here.
Get this error message out of there because it looks kind of ugly.
And the next thing I want to show you is that you can also index using variables.
So I'm going to create a variable ID.
And then we can access this element in the list.
Now this is nothing different from what I've done up here.
Literally exactly the same.
The only thing is that now I'm using a variable.
And why is this useful?
Because you will find very often that you need to define a particular index based on some calculation
or based on a parameter.
And then, you know, you might have like lots of code in, in here that you're running.
And then you need to access this element.
So you don't want to have to hard code it.
You want it to be based on this variable that gets defined up here.
There are two more things that I would like to show you about indexing in this video.
One is that these indices must be integers.
So for example, if I write 3.0 I'm going to get an error and it says the error message is at list indices
must be integers or slices not float.
And you know here you might think, well come on, that doesn't make sense.
But because this is still three.
But you know, we can imagine a case like this.
What is the three point fourth index into a into a list.
Okay.
So this needs to be an integer.
If you have a, you know, the outcome of some other calculation that turns out to be a whole number
but is represented as a float, then you can do something like this.
You can say int.
So now I'm using the function int to convert this floating point number 3.0 Zero into the integer three,
and then we get a result and that's fine.
Okay.
And then the last thing I want to show you before doing like a little pop quiz and then we'll get to
the next video is, uh, what if you want to get multiple elements out of this list?
So, you know, so far we've just been extracting single elements from this list.
Uh, what if you want to get, let's say, the one and the three out of this list.
Now you might think of doing something like this.
So creating this variable ID to be a list of two indices that we want to extract, index one and index
three.
Now that seems like it should work but unfortunately it doesn't work.
Uh, and it says the list indices must be integers or slices, not lists.
This is actually exactly the same error message we saw before with 3.0.
But there it said not float Load.
Okay, so this, you know, seems like it should work.
It turns out that we need to use slightly different methods to access multiple elements of a list.
So in the next video, I'm going to tell you about slices.
And a little bit later on when I introduce the numpy library, you will learn that you actually can
use a approach that looks really, really similar to this when the variables are numpy arrays, uh,
or PyTorch tensors and not lists.
So this kind of syntax sort of works um, for different types of variables.
But for now, suffice it to say that this does not work.
Uh, but there are multiple ways to get something like this to work.
Okay, so now I have a little pop quiz for you.
Here is the pop quiz.
So I have written down this list here, and I encourage you to pause the video and also write down this
list so you have it as well.
And now your goal in this pop quiz is to extract this word here.
Yummy from this entire list.
So how do you do that?
How do you get this word yummy out of this list?
So please pause the video and work through this little pop quiz.
When you get stuck.
Or if you have a solution, then you can come back to the video.
And now I will show you how to access this.
Okay, so this is tricky because we have a list with one two, three, four, five elements.
There are five things stored in this list, but it's a lot of mixed type of information.
So here we have an integer.
Here we have a string.
Here we have another list more string.
And now this whole thing is a dictionary right.
You recognize it as a dictionary because it has curly brackets.
And also you can see the key value pairs.
So key and then a colon and then the value.
And then here's a comma to separate another key value pair.
Okay, so first of all let's just extract this dictionary.
So that's list list.
And this is element 01234.
So here you go.
Element four gives us the dictionary.
Oops I have to run this code gives us the dictionary.
Now we have the dictionary and we want to extract the word yummy.
Well what is this word yummy.
It is the value that is associated with this key penguin.
So we can use again square brackets and then penguin like this.
And now we get the word yummy.
Now I have never eaten a penguin and I'm pretty sure I never would.
I mostly vegan actually, but.
So I don't actually know if penguins are yummy, but they certainly are cute, just like squirrels are
cute.
Anyway, all of that madness aside, now you've learned more about indexing.
In the next video, you will learn about slicing.